and Viki the press briefing is just
about stars so let's join it good
afternoon and welcome to today's Downing
Street press conference I'm pleased to
be joined by Professor Jonathan van tan
deputy chief medical officer and also
professor Yvonne Doyle medical director
at public health England let me just
start by saying I think on behalf of us
all huge congratulations to the Prime
Minister and to carry on the wonderful
news of the birth of their baby boy I
spoken to the PM and I can tell you that
both mum and son are doing really well
now next let me give an update on the
latest data on cope on coronavirus from
our Cobra data file and I can report
that through the government's ongoing
monitoring and testing program as of
today they have now been 818 thousand
five hundred and thirty-nine tests for
the virus across the UK including
fifty-two thousand four hundred and
twenty-nine tests that took place
yesterday one hundred and sixty five
thousand two hundred and twenty-one
people have tested positive and that's
an increase of 4076 cases on yesterday's
number now as the health secretary
announced yesterday from today we're
moving to an improved daily reporting
system for deaths so that deaths in all
settings are included wherever the
individual has tested positive for kovat
19 rather than just those in hospitals
and those figures show that up to
yesterday on the new measure we have
recorded an additional three thousand
eight hundred and eleven deaths in total
and I think it's just important to say
that those additional deaths were spread
over the period from the second of March
for the 28th of April so they they don't
represent a sudden surge in the number
of deaths
sadly today's figures show an additional
765 deaths compared to yesterday I'll
let professor Doyle talk us through the
data in detail in a little while but I
think we must never lose sight of the
fact that behind every statistic there
are many human lives that
have been tragically lost before their
time we also pay tribute of course to
those caring for the sick and yesterday
at 11 o'clock in the morning the whole
country observed a minute's silence a
moment to reflect on the sacrifice of
all of our frontline workers who have
died whilst dedicating themselves to
caring for and serving others now on the
16th of April I set out five principles
that would guide our approach to the
transition away from the current set of
social distancing measures in place and
into a second phase we continue to see
evidence in the data of a flattening of
the peak of the virus and that is only
happening because we delivered on the
two central pillars of our strategic
approach to defeating the coronavirus
the first one was that we reinforced our
NHS capacity through the nightingale
hospitals the extra critical care
capacity more ventilator beds and extra
doctors and nurses on the frontline and
the second is that we introduced the
social distancing measures at the right
time guided by the scientific and
medical evidence and the public's
overwhelming support for those rules has
helped save lives and protect the NHS
from becoming overwhelmed now we're
still coming through the peak and this
is as I've said before a delicate and
dangerous moment in this crisis so I
know that a lot of people have made a
lot of sacrifices which is why it's so
important that we don't let up now and
risk undoing all of that hard work so as
we look to the future our five tests
remain absolutely key first we must
continue to boost NHS capetti capacity
preventing it from being overwhelmed
second we need to see a sustained and
consistent fall in the number of deaths
thirdly we need to see further
reductions in the rate of infection to
manageable levels across all the
relevant areas and settings and fourth
we must be confident that the NHS will
be able to cope with future demands and
that includes as a result of any changes
to existing measures or new measures
that we may need to take
fifth and I think this is probably the
most critical of the five principles we
need to be confident that any
adjustments to the current measures will
not risk a second peak of infections
that could overwhelm the NHS a second
spike will be harmful to public health
and it would result in many more deaths
from covert 19 that itself would lead to
a second lockdown inflicting further
prolonged economic pain on the country
and as the governor of the Bank of
England Andrew Bailey said last week
that wouldn't just be economically
dangerous it would inflict a serious
blow to public confidence so this issue
of a second spike and their need to
avoid that it's not a theoretical risk
and it's not something that's just
confined to the United Kingdom having
relaxed restrictions in Germany over the
last week they've seen a rise in the
transmission rate of coronavirus
Chancellor Merkel has said publicly and
she's made it clear that they might need
a second lockdown in Germany if if the
infection rate continues to rise so this
is a very real risk and it's vital we
proceed carefully guided by the
scientific advice so that our next step
through this crisis is a sure-footed one
well mustn't gamble away the sacrifices
and the progress that we've made we must
continue to follow the scientific
evidence and we must continue to take
the right decisions at the right moment
in time now we are working on all of the
potential options for a second phase
there is light at the end of the tunnel
whether you're an NHS worker on the
frontline working tirelessly shift after
shift or a parent at home with young
children but we do need to be patient
and we need to be careful as we come
through what is a moment of maximum risk
so we'll wait for Sage's next review of
the data in early May we're ramping up
the testing with capacity now at over
73,000 per day and 52,000 429 tests
carried out per day and eligibility for
those tests has now been expanded again
further to include anyone who needs to
go to work but
can't work and can't work remotely and
who has symptoms it also includes anyone
over 65 with symptoms and all care home
residents as well as care home staff and
at the same time as we ramp up the
testing capacity we'll keep working on
our tracking and tracing capability
which is going to be a key component in
the next phase of this crisis will
continue to source ventilators and
personal protective equipment both at
home and abroad
Paul Dayton is leading the national
effort to increase domestic production
and supply we continue to source PP from
abroad we're setting ourselves out as
the international buyer of choice in the
international marketplace and I can tell
you that in the last 10 days we've
secured over 5 million miles from China
we've had three flights with gowns from
Turkey because we know that every single
one of those items of PPE is needed by
those working so hard on the front line
both in NHS and also in our care homes
and our international effort isn't
confined to procurement I can tell you
we've also made enormous progress in
returning British nationals who
otherwise would have been at risk of
being stranded abroad and it's worth
just noting that since the outbreak in
Wuhan we've helped an estimated 1.3
million British nationals return on
commercial flights and we've done that
by working with the airlines and with
those governments to make sure that the
flights can run and the airspace is left
open and we brought back over 200,000
British nationals from Spain 50,000 from
Australia and over 11,000 from Pakistan
to name but just three countries as well
as those commercial flights
we've also charted flights where
commercial options were not possible and
we've now reached a stage where we
brought back over 20,000 British
nationals on 21 flights and that
includes 9,000 British nationals who
have been brought back from India 2,000
from South Africa and 1,200 from Peru so
it's also just in terms of repatriations
worth bearing in mind that on the 17th
of March
when we changed our travel advice for
those traveling on cruise ships there
were something like 19,000 British
passengers on 60 cruise ships sailing
around the world and as the board
restrictions were put in place by
country after country we faced a
daunting task in getting our people home
but we stuck at it and six six weeks
later we've now got all ninety nineteen
thousand British passengers back home
safe and sound
so that was an enormous effort and we
recognized that the job isn't yet done
we'll continue with this unprecedented
effort with further charter flights
coming back from New Zealand Pakistan
and Bangladesh amongst others over the
next week or so so I must pay tribute at
this point to all of the outstanding
work our consular teams working night
and day at the SCO in London but also
dye embassies and our High Commissioners
around the world have been putting in
finally the health secretary announced
last week that UK trials have started as
we draw on the incredible scientific
talent that we've got in this country to
pursue a vaccine and that effort too has
an international dimension to it so
today we announced that the UK will
provide Gavi which is the international
vaccine alliance with the equivalent of
330 million pounds each year over the
next five years as we seek to come up
with a vaccine both to protect the
British people but also to help immunize
millions of the poorest and most
vulnerable people right around the world
combining the depth of our innovative
know-how with the big-hearted
determination that is characterized on
national effort to defeat the corona
virus and having said that I'm now going
to ask you Vaughn to talk us through the
latest data slides it'll know to you
Thank You Secretary of State we have a
selection of measures and slides here
today and to show and the first one is
just to remind us of the five tests for
adjusting the lockdown as the Secretary
of State has said this is about capacity
it's about a fall in the daily deaths
it's about reliable data
and also that we have good supplies of
material for our NHS and care staff and
that were confident that the adjustments
to the current measures will not risk a
second peak but moving to the actual
size in the next slide please
shows and the more it's going on out in
society at the moment this is a
transport slide which shows the use of
various forms of transport as we've seen
up to now very dramatic Falls in most
modes but there has been an uptick in
motor vehicles and the message here
really is that we are still passing
through this peak and this use of motor
vehicles it's the highest working day
use since the 23rd of March and we
really have to be vigilant that most
people are making huge efforts to stay
at home and save lives and this is a
slightly worrying so please do stay at
home protect the NHS save lives and you
know go out for the necessities and the
transport of data will reflect that and
the next slide please is about new cases
in the NHS and in the country at the
moment in the UK and we can see here the
increasing amount of testing that's
going on through the orange bars but
basically the cases have remained
broadly stable over the last weeks and
that is good news but I want to move on
really to show you a little more about
that the next slide please does show
this so now we have a slide about people
in hospital and this is broadly good
news because the numbers in hospital
have decreased from over 18,000 to over
15,000 that's a 16% decrease and it's
manifest in all regions you can see how
London had an early peak but now London
is declining in its use of hospital
facilities but of course other regions
may overtake that so we do have to be
careful as I say we are passing through
this peak were not through this yet
and the next slide thank you is about
critical care about use in the UK and
this means all beds both M high
dependency and intensive care wards use
and this is good news because we can see
here that 40% of the beds are being used
that means there is critical care
capacity and that is accredited to the
NHS for how it has got us through this
crisis to this stage and there is a
capacity and room for patients who need
it and the next slide please is about
the cumulative daily covered deaths now
this is an interesting slide where we
begin to get in a little bit more into
what is going on with deaths so the
deaths in hospital are they is the blue
line and that is what has been measured
very reliably up to now but now public
health England with support from the NHS
has been in a position to congregate
deaths in all settings based on
confirmed tests that we see coming
through our labs so what we can say here
is first of all that the deaths on the
orange line are confirmed deaths from
coronavirus that tells us what exactly
is going on in all settings and when I
say all settings I mean hospitals health
protection team local the local outbreak
teams in the community broadly and in
care homes so now we see that there is a
divergence it's not here it's about 20%
divergence but it's good news in the
main in terms of what it is showing
because what it's showing is we are
getting a comprehensive picture and this
is most important for control so and
could I move on to the next slide please
which is about the daily deaths which is
excluding deaths outside of hospital so
these are hospital deaths which is what
we were looking at in the previous slide
in the blue slide and it shows this
declining trend of deaths in hospital
which they transported to increase at
the end of March and we can see it
declining but to restore still coming
through the peak because of course this
doesn't represent or
but it is good news about deaths in
hospital and that is also a credit to
the good treatment in hospital the next
slide looks at a covert deaths in all
settings and you can see there are the
it's accumulative line there the orange
line and it's good to do it that way
because otherwise you get swings and and
ups and downs when weekend's occur and
people you know are not sure what has
happened with deaths but with the line
you can see the trend and the trend is
quite flat actually and it may it may
begin to decline but we're not convinced
of that yet but it's good to show that
and the reason it starts at the 30th of
March is because this is about all
settings that was the time when we were
able to start measuring that from then
on and so this is a seven-day rolling
average and it daily and it's very
important we know what's happening daily
now on to global and so global death
comparisons are two slides here the
first one is actually just crude numbers
and you can see here a pattern that
looks like the United States has a very
high number of deaths and other
countries perhaps are aligning with each
other but the point on this slide at the
side says a number of things first of
all and these measures may not be
comprehensive measures of death in the
way that we're and we're very keen to do
here and are doing now comprehensively
so for instance in Spain and we're not
absolutely clear of whether the deaths
in Spain include all care home deaths
and this is understandable because it's
very complex and difficult to get these
measures particularly on a daily basis
which is why the news today about being
able to do this on a daily basis is very
good news although of course the news
about numbers of deaths is not good news
and again stresses how dangerous this
Pharisees house oddities for those
individuals and how we have to be ever
vigilant about how we look after each
other on how we adhere to the requests
to stay at home protect the NHS
and particularly to save lives now the
last slide is also interesting because
this now shows the cumulative death
number per million population and this
shows a very different pattern where we
can see two measures for the UK the
hospital deaths and the comprehensive
deaths are not hugely different on this
scale and but you can see where we are
now tracking much more along our
European neighbors our European
neighbors and also we've seen Italy and
Spain there in France but the u.s. of
course has dropped because we're now
measuring rates per million other
countries have increased the important
thing here is that it is compromise of
comprehensive their daily and they take
in all care settings so I thought you
would wish to see the two contrasts
thank you cellphones thank you very much
indeed I think will now turn to
questions from the media and I think
first up we've got Hugh pin from the BMC
Hugh are you there or on secretary
question about testing what support will
you give care homes in administering and
organising tests and helping them keep
residents and staff safe
well I'm happy to let neither of on
which one thing come in but just to be
clear we've expanded the eligibility
eligibility now includes anyone in a
care home where there isn't or staff and
we have obviously had a distribution
issue there's no sugarcoating the
challenge we've had with that we've
helped deliver them through the local
resilience forum we are getting the
Clipper service up and running and the
military have also done an exceptional
job and so whether it's this supply and
which we're ramping up in the way I've
described and that the health secretary
has explained or the the delivery are we
doing everything that we possibly can
Yvonne I don't know whether you will
Jonathan what I don't think well and
thanks yes indeed you so there are a
number of ways the testing is
we'll continue to happen at scale in
care homes since this epidemic in care
homes which still continues and there
has been a huge local effort both
through local government our directors
of Public Health our health protection
teams but increasingly with support from
national endeavors to get the tests to
the home to make sure staff get the
testing they need this will continue for
some considerable time until we are
convinced that we have got under this
epidemic in the care homes which is of
course of most concern couldn't testing
really have started sooner than though
well hew testing has always occurred in
during outbreaks and that has never been
given up at a local level or health
protection teams supported by others the
NHS locally have been into and going
into care homes throughout the country
but the the scale and the speed of this
epidemic is really in the last couple of
weeks and there is a huge national and
local endeavor to both not just test
which is very important but to also
understand the measures that would make
a difference in care homes and to look
at that in a very rapid way looking at
the evidence so that we can put in place
measures that protect people people are
absolutely passionate about getting this
right but it is a most complex sector to
get to 16,000 homes you know a lot of
places to to go and it critical to use
local intelligence as to where that
risks are highest also huge is worth
saying that of course you'd have to have
an enormous testing capacity to do
deliver what I think you're suggesting
we we could have all should have one of
the big challenges we've had is
asymptomatic people coming to and in and
out of care homes whether it's other
care home workers who work in more than
one place and it just staff coming in or
Wendy members family and as if on said
it's obviously a very decentralized
system but the social distancing and the
control over transmission in and out of
care homes it's probably the single
biggest factor and obviously we're doing
everything we can to give the guidance
and give their support to care homes
to achieve that down here at my TV Thank
You Secretary of State and we've
discovered that hospices are being
denied access to government managed
supplies of EPA of personal protective
equipment
unlike hospitals and care homes they are
not being included in the Maine NHS
supply chain managed by the government
through supply chain coordination
limited and instead hospices are still
relying on donations of PPE and they
happy to buy their own largely on the
open market at hugely inflated prices it
means that hospitals have told us that
they could run out of PPE within a
matter of days why is it the hospices
are being treated differently to
hospitals and care homes when it comes
to accessing PPE well again I'll defer
to Jonathan and Yvonne but basically and
I don't know of course the the hospices
that you've talked to but we've been
guided throughout by the NHS about where
aid the shortfalls have been and B
what's the priority and we've always
said that the priority is being on the
frontline in the NHS and care homes but
obviously we want to make sure we've got
enough PPE that's why we're doing all of
these flights from abroad that's why we
pull Dayton's ramping up the domestic
capacity to get to get to anyone that
may need it and obviously Hospice is
very important there as well yes at
resit so it's very important we
ascertain where these problems are on
that's why local intelligence is very
important there the guidance covers all
places where people are at risk so
that's very important to say there there
is no differentiation here in where
people are at risk and what they might
need what may often be lacking is the
look at the knowledge of where there are
pockets of problems and we've had this
throughout so it is welcome to know this
and there are ways in which hospices can
actually make known what they need
through help lines but if that isn't
happening then it's very important that
we do here this supplementary anything
you want to come back on yes thank you
thanks for you state on that and
Hospital UK that the main charity I
understand have been coordinating and
speaking to the relevant bodies within
government to explain and have provided
evidence that shows they need this PPA
so and you absolutely
to say it must go where it needs to but
they have made a very strong case to say
they need it they're tweeting three
times as many terminally ill patients
now than they were this time last year
they're treating people with coronavirus
so they definitely do need this PPE the
assurance they want is when they'll be
included in the NHS supply chain because
they say they are caring for very sick
and vulnerable people as well oh
absolutely and my heart goes out to all
of those working in hospices those that
are being cared for and their family and
we'll do everything we can in the way of
on describe to make sure that we get to
the BP to them as soon as we physically
can bethe Rigby from Sky Thank You first
Secretary of State on Sunday you said
you were and I quote you reasonably
confident that deaths and care homes are
coming down at about the same rate more
broadly as captured by the NHS figures
what does this new data tell you are we
actually approaching a peak in care
homes if not overall and professor van
Tam extra deaths today show the
situation even worse than we knew but
it's true too that these numbers could
be unreported and er reported still in
part because of low testing levels
should we be braced for a father upward
revision of these figures in the future
so better look in the way that Yvonne
described the importance of getting
these measures refined is that we've got
a clearer picture and of course what we
like is a perfect picture and we're
constantly looking to see whether we can
modify and leaner a more granular
picture and the reality is and I think
when sage gave its evidence on its
review of the social distancing measures
around the 16th of April I think was the
press conference that was shortly before
then it they were very clear that their
the our level was coming down it was
below one in the community but there
were challenges in hospital settings
we're getting to grips with that but
also in care homes so we've known about
this challenge and we're doing
everything we can to meet it peepees one
of the aspects of it testing is another
but they're probably the single biggest
thing and this is tough in a
decentralized localized
set of care homes is making sure that we
control the ebb and flow of people into
those care homes that may risk
transmitting the virus so alongside all
of those other practical measures
disseminating that guidance refining
that guidance doing supporting those
care homes as best we can
it's the surest way that we will really
get a grip and then drive down those
infection levels in the caring scenario
if one is only figured that or I might
just add but Jonathan can supplement
this so Beth the question is opposite to
what CQC also measure so CQC will also
put out deaths in care homes and they
will not always be confirmed by testing
so in due course those deaths may sadly
may occur on death certificate so we may
expect more than we're seeing at the
moment yes sorry Jonathan as dis work is
very miser Vaughn said earlier in
relation to slides what we're trying to
do is get the most granular picture I
think when it comes to the international
comparisons I'm not certainly not not
all of the countries are recording even
to the level that we've got to now which
is why some of those international
comparisons but but we just committed to
maximum transparency one because people
should know the full picture and
secondly when you know more about the
data you've got a better chance of
gripping it in the way that we're
absolutely committed to doing Jonathan
yes thank you better I'll answer your
question in a slightly different way and
say that clearly we have moved to a
system of recording deaths that is
better and more granular because it
covers more than just the hospital
setting but in epidemiology terms
eventually we will be able to compute a
different estimate of deaths called
excess deaths and that is really
accepting that across the year deaths go
up in the winter and down in the summer
in a broadly oscillating wave and one
can work out what the average is over
multiple years and then work out what in
this particular coronavirus panda
our departure has been from that in
terms of total number of deaths and that
will give us an excess death figure and
that will be highly comparable when
other excess death figures come out
across the world including many parts of
Europe in fact there's a standardized
methodology that the Europeans use for
calculating excess mortality so to your
point will there be more I think I'd
kind of turn that question slightly or
turn the answer and say in time we'll
have a much better answer when we start
to look at excess mortality as a total
which will take into account both deaths
related to kovat 19 and death that may
have occurred not due to kovat 19 at all
but as a consequence of the crisis and
some of those will take time to come
through and I'm afraid that is a
phenomenon that we will face right
across the world with this awful crisis
that we're in you about yeah just just
quickly just just to follow up it's been
really encouraging that although the
death toll has been horrific that it has
been falling in hospitals now oh you
have the care home data is it falling in
hospitals but that death tally going up
still in care homes I'm not sure we have
the data bitterlin I don't think we can
say that quite yet but I wouldn't make
any predictions about what will happen
in care homes but we will we should know
that soon because the hospital curve has
declined bearing in mind that still the
majority of deaths do occur in hospital
including those who are resident in care
homes Beth thanks very much Andy Bell
from channel 5 thanks very much um you
have your five tests that you say have
to be met before we can move on in terms
of lockdown right now how many of those
tests do you think you're passing well
as as I said when I set them out we will
need the advice from Sage which was
going to be three weeks after
I think the 16th of April so it will
come early May so we don't know yet
there is some positive signs in the data
but as Ivana said and as we've been at
pains to say we're a delicate and
dangerous moment in this challenge we're
coming through the peak but we're not
there yet
which is why keeping on focusing on the
social distancing measures which which
has been one of the great successes of
the approach taken because of the
support of the British people is so
important so people sitting at home and
watching this have saved lives by
following that guidance and until we're
out of the woods if er if I could put it
like that and we they need to keep doing
that and we won't know that we've
reached that point till Sage give us
that review of the evidence I mean can I
come back in and of course the
government has said several times that
the NHS has not been overwhelmed has not
been overtopped are you saying you're
not even satisfied at this stage you can
say you've passed test number one well
then it just quite clearly hasn't been
overwhelmed that's been the second key
critical bit of the strategy which we
delivered successfully it's a great
credit to those in the frontline but we
have also got the ventilator beds of
critical compare critical care capacity
up the military have done a great job in
supporting the new Nightingale hospitals
so we're confident at this stage but of
course if you look at the five tests
that and you know and then you know and
I know you're taking this very seriously
we've also said that we need to make
sure that we can see to the future that
that will still be the case and also
that with any changes we might make and
what that would do not just the corona
virus infection rate as we've seen in
Germany but also to the non kovat cases
we need to be confidently NHS will be
able to cope so you're right absolutely
to point to the five tests and I've just
got to say this moment in time we're
waiting for sage as evidence on all five
aspects which will get we're expecting
in early May can I bring in Jason grows
from the Daily Mail I thanks phone
secretary you may have seen overnight
the new male force charity is brought in
a million pounds worth of PPE from China
now you know how difficult that is
you've got your own challenges with PPE
I wanted how hopeful that sort of power
sector in
and to Professor van Tam we've heard a
little bit about this idea that the
virus perhaps fades more slowly outdoors
and it does indoors or if you could tell
us a little bit more about that and what
the implications of that might be
well Jason fantastic male fourth
campaign 100,000 miles 50,000 overalls
all going to those frontline workers in
the NHS in care homes
I've just got to pay tribute the Daily
Mail is really contributed to that
national effort that we were talking
about and it all counts so huge thanks I
think from the government side okay so
thank you for the question about how the
virus spreads and to what extent it
spreads and if I can just replay the
question back to you to be sure I heard
it right you are asking about the
difference between indoors and outdoors
yeah okay so um we have learnt a great
deal over the years from studying
influenza and patterns of transmission
of influenza and I accept that
the corona virus is a new virus it is
not entirely the same as influenza and
we are getting more and more data on
transmission of kovat 19 as the days and
weeks roll by but nevertheless there is
a definite truism across all of the
science literature that ventilation is a
most critical part of reducing
transmission from respiratory viruses
and if you think about being outdoors
first of all by and large distancing
between human beings is greater anyway
but if you just stand still for a moment
and experience just normal breezes and
air currents around you you absolutely
get a sense that any kind of plumes of
anything are going to be very rapidly
dispersed and from that perspective it
is absolutely categorically clear that
outdoor spaces with
higher degrees of ventilation are less
problematic environments for
transmission than indoor spaces and of
course you only have to go as far as
thinking about flu and summer winter and
the way we live our lives in the winter
we live indoors in conditions of
relatively low ventilation with the
windows closed in the summer we go
outdoors we leave the doors and the
windows open when we're at home
Jason's want to come back on any of that
thanks for your codes and I was gonna
come back on that latter point with
people obviously thinking about what's
going to happen in this next phase given
that different might it mean that there
is some hope for things like garden
centers outdoor events like Park burns
going to the beach maybe even beer
gardens before people sort of give up
hope
thank you for the question Ike I
completely get it and understand why
you're asking the question sage
absolutely is keeping all of that
evidence under very considerably
detailed review and that evidence has
been formulated into guidance that we
are putting forwards to ministers on a
periodic basis now in terms of any of
the events you any of the settings that
you mentioned I just want to take us
through the journey a little and say
that these are complex and at various
different points
they might involve the congregation of
individuals and one has to be very
painstaking and very careful about
thinking through some of these before we
make the wrong move to relaxed measures
and so from that perspective I think all
of your comments are valid but I think
we have to be extremely sure-footed and
extremely painstaking about this this
virus will absolutely come back you've
seen Secretary of State refer to the
resurgence in Germany and the difficult
consider
that are going on there this is with us
for quite some time potentially for as
long as until we get a vaccine so from
that perspective we have to be really
careful and really sure-footed and I'm
just not going to suggest for a moment
that any of this should be rushed thanks
Jason
dan bloom from The Daily Mirror hello
I'd like to ask if we had been able to
access better testing and screening
earlier than we did for care home
residents so for example we're testing
those discharged from hospital before
mid April and some of the other things
the government has introduced might some
of the deaths that have been published
today being avoided I think there's
always learning in an unprecedented
unique crisis like this that we want to
feedback in to make sure that we can
refine and fine-tune the measures we're
taking a you'll know Dan we take the the
actions and the steps that we take on
the best scientific evidence we've got
at the time I think in relation to games
as I mentioned before the key thing
above all is to manage the transmission
of the of people that muck the the FM
flow of people into those games that
might carry the virus and that of course
includes family members and friends it
glued that are working in more than one
care home setting it includes NHS staff
so on top of testing and BPA and all the
things I understandably you want to
raise I think that's probably the single
most important aspect you want to come
back on anything else there Dan I quite
like to ask the medical experts and what
they think at the same question because
it's they may have of course yeah thank
you Dan
so and it's a it's a very good question
and it's a it's also a learning one but
I put it this way and there where there
have been outbreaks in care homes there
has always been intervention throughout
they said that would be no different to
normal practice what we have learned a
lot about is how the virus is behaving
in different populations and one of the
very sad things that we have found is
that the virus when older people get
this virus is affecting predominantly
older people particular people over 75
and one of the reasons that
the deaths are high there is that
actually they demise quite quickly if
they get it particularly if they get the
dose of this virus that perhaps a
younger person might be able to put over
their shoulder because of the way their
immune system or so that's one feature
so it may not even be possible to have
got to the test by the time the event
happens second we've now learned from
looking at the literature that they
we've asked an ask what is it that would
make a difference to stop this epidemic
in a home and the movement of staff is
an absolutely critical one and how the
virus actually moves within a home and
that has really only begun to become
evident since we've been able to look at
and new techniques like genomics and
that has given us a huge insight into
the dynamics of what is happening within
a home and not every home will be the
same in in the way that you know people
residents and the staff interact the use
of bank staff and but there is some very
interesting learning that we've come
across quite recently now weather
testing makes a would have made a huge
difference or not is impossible to say
at the moment and that's one thing we
want to learn but there has been testing
but I think there are possibly more
fundamental and structural issues about
how care homes are run in an epidemic
that we are now looking to implement
thanks Dan Matt foster from politics
home I the Secretary of State and your
colleagues have spoken about as all
being in this together but they're a
sizable number of people in the UK who
despite paying taxes are barred from
claiming universal credit Housing
Benefit or free school meals for their
kids because the home offices deem that
they have no recourse it's a public
funds some of those people are working
in key frontline jobs right now in the
NHS Social Care and its delivery drivers
and will the government consider at
least temporarily causing an RPF status
during the outbreak and if not what
reassurance can you give people and that
they're not going to be shy of the same
how we all may need to rely on them
during an economic crisis look
absolutely understand the point and
obviously we feel for anyone who's going
through the the challenges whether a
professional
in there at home I know the Home
Secretary's been looking at this very
carefully she keeps these issues under
constant review I think she's been
before the Home Affairs Committee today
and said that we'll always look at new
measures and what more can be done
particularly in relation I think to
frontline workers from overseas who are
working needing care homes or the NHS so
I can't give a commitment but I can tell
you that the Home Secretary is very
carefully looking at that and the
government wants to make sure we're as
sensitive as flexible in our approach as
we possibly can be you want to come back
with another one there Matt that's fine
thanks very good and then finally Peter
mad lead from the Express install Thank
You Secretary of State's question for
the medical experts schools across the
West Midlands are starting to consider
how things might look once they were
running again the education secretary
said today that schools will reopening
phases and clearly some form of social
distancing will be required can you give
us an idea of how you think social
distancing will work in a school setting
and do you is each home education
continuing for some pupils into next
year secondly a question for you
Secretary of State you mentioned
repatriation flights before the still
thousands of British citizens stranded
in India particularly in the Punjab
region a lot of West Midlands in that
area of the country in fact the CTM
charter team is said this week that
20,000 people have registered for
flights or from an unwritten in the
north is only one flights every couple
of days with a maximum capacity of 300
so people who are running out of money
and medicine are being told it's not
possible to confirm when they'll be able
to get back now do you have an idea of
how many Brits are stuck in India and
are you planning to increase the number
of repatriation flights for northern
cities so these people can be turned
home well thanks very much and look can
I first of all say - incredible effort
from the West Midlands where you're
reporting both the NHS care homes and
frankly the people - following the
social distancing guidance has made a
massive difference we follow the
regional impact of all the measures that
we're putting in place and NHS capacity
and I know the West Midlands are putting
an incredible shift on repatriation
flights and just to give you a sense
we've already charted so separate from
the commercial flights 58 returning more
than 12,000 people from across South
Asia I can tell you that in recent days
we've announced 28 more charter flights
with the capacity to get around 77
thousand more Brits back home they'll
return home our that that scheduling
would be up into that May the 7th they
include 14 flights from India another
nine from Pakistan and five from
Bangladesh so we're doing everything we
can to get stranded Brits from the West
Midlands and right across the country
home and as I've said that in my earlier
remarks I think the Foreign Office and
the Department of Transport and our
missions abroad put in a heroic shift
but they look we the jobs not yet done
and as long as there are people that are
in a predicament we want to see what
more we can do I don't with a Jonathan
or Yvonne want to come back on schools
yes please Jonathan so I've got two sons
Alex and Theo at home 11 and 12 and I
know exactly how difficult it is for
them wanting to go to school and the
stress and strain that this is placing
on people but I'm absolutely clear that
it was the right thing to do to close
schools when we did and equally we now
have to be very careful indeed about how
we relaxed social distancing measures
and when we do it and clearly there are
multiple combinations of how one might
think about that I'm not going to go
into those in detail because the
scientific thinking is not yet complete
or settled on those it is still a matter
of detailed daily and deliberation and
study and clearly as part of that
relaxing schools is in the mix precisely
how one would do that I'm not going to
comment further because I think there
are multiple permutations that you can
think of and we have to work through
those carefully one by one
scientifically
and get the best and the most optimized
answer we can so I wouldn't want to make
any premature your comments about
exactly how and to what extent schools
are going to being involved in how we
relax social distancing carefully
painstakingly and as and when we can
with safety peter is there anything else
you'd like to come back on yes mr. van
tan if I can be a bit more direct with
my question in that case do you think
it's possible for groups of young people
to stay to meet ours all day long in
school I think that would be very
difficult with a classroom of
four-year-olds
at five-year-olds I think that'll be
really tricky I think we have to think
through all of those measures and how
that might work
thanks very much Peter I think we've now
got a couple of questions for members of
the public
we've got Matthew from sorry who's
asking what has been done to ensure that
visitors or returning citizens coming
through British ports and airports are
going into a 14 day quarantine and why
hasn't this been implemented before and
I'll turn to Yvonne to answer this but
we've looked at this regularly I'll ask
this question actually quite a few times
and so far the the advice has come back
that actually it wouldn't make any
significant material difference to
stopping the spread it may may become
more relevant as we progress through
this crook this crisis and as we bear
down on the transmission rate within the
UK but if on I don't know if there's
anything at your dad it's actually said
not very much so Matthew thank you it's
a really interesting question and
obviously as we move into a new phase
over the coming months it's one that
will come back again and the scientific
advisory committee is looking at all of
the measures that ports could and should
perhaps do implement that would make a
difference that's the important thing
because otherwise we're just disrupting
everything for no particular gain and we
have had some experience of it of course
during the contain phase when we worked
intensively with all the ports in in
Britain to ensure that we kept our
citizens as safe as possible
and we've learned quite bitter from that
but there are a number of measures of
which quarantine is one and it is being
looked at and of course as we keep their
ports and the airports open for vital
supply chains that's a consideration as
well but we'll continue to keep that
under review I think there's a second
question which is coming up on the
screen as there has been success so far
in not overwhelming the NHS and there
seems to be plenty of space in the
nightingale hospitals
why don't we remove some residents from
care homes for their immediate safety if
this takes place immediately and perhaps
with military assistance this could save
some lives is it feasible in any way
well I'll let Devon talk to the current
situation what I can say it's something
that has been under constant discussion
of course we want to make sure on the
nightingales have been amazing and the
military done a great job in supporting
the NHS teams we've got to make sure
we've got the NHS capacities as we set
out in our five principles for how we
might move forward to the next phase it
it's not just there to deal with the
current cases but but to deal with the
future demands that may be put on the
NHS both in relation to the virus but
also other health needs but we are
looking at that not least in the context
of some of the cohorting that may need
to be done which hasn't been done in
some areas some areas it has so it's
certainly something that again remains
under review thank you thank you Bob yes
so it is and the Nightingale hospital is
they they operate on a number of
different models and we're looking at
the difference between those models and
whether they are adaptable to
circumstances that may arise as we go
forward of which this would be one and
the issue about the home residence is
that this has to be a humane solution
for people and that it isn't more
damaging or harmful to have people move
particularly people who are already
frail vulnerable maybe suffer from
dementia so it has to be looked at as a
judgment in terms of what is the best
thing to do for those people and what is
the most humane intervention give
the risk they may face but it is
certainly it is something that is looked
at and will be continued it also just
saying book that and one of the pieces
of learning that the Cabinet Office had
from 2016 when we looked at the lessons
learned from the flu epidemic we had was
the the shift of people out of the NHS
and into the community including care
homes or something that was important
and which should be taken forward but I
understand your question we've got to
make sure all of these things are done
safely and that doesn't mean that
certain NHS facilities couldn't be used
in the way that you've described so
we're we're looking at all of that thank
you very much Bob thanks everyone for
all of your questions and that brings us
to a close today's Downing Street press
conference thank you very much the
Foreign Secretary Dominic Rob they're
ending today's daily Downing Street news
briefing